2.23
nainaṁ chindanti śastrāṇi
nainaṁ dahati pāvakaḥ
na cainaṁ kledayanty āpo
na śoṣayati mārutaḥ
na—never; enam—unto this soul; chindanti—can cut into pieces; śastrāṇi —all weapons; na—never; enam—unto this soul; dahati—burns; pāvakaḥ—fire; na—never; ca—also; enam—unto this soul; kledayanti—moistens; āpaḥ —water; na—never; śoṣayati—dries; mārutaḥ—wind.
TRANSLATION
The soul can never be cut into pieces by any weapon, nor can he be burned by fire, nor moistened by water, nor withered by the wind.
PURPORT
All kinds of weapons, swords, flames, rains, tornadoes, etc., are unable to kill the spirit soul.
It appears that there were many kinds of weapons made of earth, water, air, ether, etc., in addition to the modern weapons of fire.
Even the nuclear weapons of the modern age are classified as fire weapons, but formerly there were other weapons made of all different types of material elements.
Firearms were counteracted by water weapons, which are now unknown to modern science.
Nor do modern scientists have knowledge of tornado weapons.
Nonetheless, the soul can never be cut into pieces, nor annihilated by any number of weapons, regardless of scientific devices.
Nor was it ever possible to cut the individual souls from the original Soul.
The Māyāvādī, however, cannot describe how the individual soul evolved from ignorance and consequently became covered by illusory energy.
Because they are atomic individual souls (sanātana) eternally, they are prone to be covered by the illusory energy, and thus they become separated from the association of the Supreme Lord, just as the sparks of the fire, although one in quality with the fire, are prone to be extinguished when out of the fire.
In the Varāha Purāṇa, the living entities are described as separated parts and parcels of the Supreme.
They are eternally so, according to the Bhagavad-gītā also.
So, even after being liberated from illusion, the living entity remains a separate identity, as is evident from the teachings of the Lord to Arjuna.
Arjuna became liberated by the knowledge received from Kṛṣṇa, but he never became one with Kṛṣṇa.
