11.37
kasmāc ca te na nameran mahātman
garīyase brahmaṇo ’py ādi-kartre
ananta deveśa jagan-nivāsa
tvam akṣaraṁ sad-asat tat paraṁ yat
kasmāt—why; ca—also; te—unto You; na—not; nameran—offer proper obeisances; mahātman—O great one; garīyase—You are better than; brahmaṇaḥ—Brahmā; api—although; ādi-kartre—the supreme creator; ananta—unlimited; deveśa—God of the gods; jagat-nivāsa—O refuge of the universe; tvam—You are; akṣaram—imperishable; sat-asat—cause and effect; tat-param—transcendental; yat—because.
TRANSLATION
O great one, who stands above even Brahmā, You are the original master.
Why should they not offer their homage up to You, O limitless one? O refuge of the universe, You are the invincible source, the cause of all causes, transcendental to this material manifestation.
PURPORT
By this offering of obeisances, Arjuna indicates that Kṛṣṇa is worshipable by everyone.
He is all-pervading, and He is the Soul of every soul.
Arjuna is addressing Kṛṣṇa as mahātmā, which means that He is most magnanimous and unlimited.
Ananta indicates that there is nothing which is not covered by the influence and energy of the Supreme Lord, and deveśa means that He is the controller of all demigods and is above them all.
He is the center of the whole universe.
Arjuna also thought that it was fitting that all the perfect living entities and all powerful demigods offer their respectful obeisances unto Him because no one is greater than Him.
He especially mentions that Kṛṣṇa is greater than Brahmā because Brahmā is created by Him.
Brahmā is born out of the lotus stem grown from the navel abdomen of Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, who is Kṛṣṇa’s plenary expansion; therefore Brahmā and Lord Śiva, who is born of Brahmā, and all other demigods must offer their respectful obeisances.
Thus the Lord is respected by Lord Śiva and Brahmā and similar other demigods.
The word akṣaram is very significant because this material creation is subject to destruction, but the Lord is above this material creation.
He is the cause of all causes, and being so, He is superior to all the conditioned souls within this material nature as well as the material cosmic manifestation itself.
He is therefore the all-great Supreme.
