11.43
pitāsi lokasya carācarasya
tvam asya pūjyaś ca gurur garīyān
na tvat-samo ’sty abhyadhikaḥ kuto ’nyo
loka-traye ’py apratima-prabhāva
pitā—father; asi—You are; lokasya—of all the world; cara—moving; acarasya—nonmoving; tvam—You are; asya—of this; pūjyaḥ—worshipable; ca—also; guruḥ—master; garīyān—glorious; na—never; tvat-samaḥ—equal to You; asti—there is; abhyadhikaḥ—greater; kutaḥ—how is it possible; anyaḥ—other; loka-traye—in three planetary systems; api—also; apratima—immeasurable; prabhāva—power.
TRANSLATION
You are the father of this complete cosmic manifestation, the worshipable chief, the spiritual master.
No one is equal to You, nor can anyone be one with You.
Within the three worlds, You are immeasurable.
PURPORT
The Lord Kṛṣṇa is worshipable as a father is worshipable for his son.
He is the spiritual master because He originally gave the Vedic instructions to Brahmā, and presently He is also instructing Bhagavad-gītā to Arjuna; therefore He is the original spiritual master, and any bona fide spiritual master at the present moment must be a descendant in the line of disciplic succession stemming from Kṛṣṇa.
Without being a representative of Kṛṣṇa, one cannot become a teacher or spiritual master of transcendental subject matter.
The Lord is being paid obeisances in all respects.
He is of immeasurable greatness.
No one can be greater than the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, because no one is equal to or higher than Kṛṣṇa within any manifestation, spiritual or material.
Everyone is below Him.
No one can excel Him.
The Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa has senses and a body like the ordinary man, but for Him there is no difference between His senses, body, mind and Himself.
Foolish persons who do not know Him perfectly say that Kṛṣṇa is different from His soul, mind, heart and everything else.
Kṛṣṇa is absolute; therefore His activities and potencies are supreme.
It is also stated that He does not have senses like ours.
He can perform all sensual activities; therefore His senses are neither imperfect nor limited.
No one can be greater than Him, no one can be equal to Him, and everyone is lower than Him.
Whoever knows His transcendental body, activities and perfection, after quitting his body, returns to Him and doesn’t come back again to this miserable world.
Therefore one should know that Kṛṣṇa’s activities are different from others.
The best policy is to follow the principles of Kṛṣṇa; that will make one perfect.
It is also stated that there is no one who is master of Kṛṣṇa; everyone is His servant.
Only Kṛṣṇa is God, and everyone is servant.
Everyone is complying with His order.
There is no one who can deny His order.
Everyone is acting according to His direction, being under His superintendence.
As stated in the Brahmā-saṁhitā, He is the cause of all causes.
