12.13-14
adveṣṭā sarva-bhūtānāṁ
maitraḥ karuṇa eva ca
nirmamo nirahaṅkāraḥ
sama-duḥkha-sukhaḥ kṣamī
santuṣṭaḥ satataṁ yogī
yatātmā dṛḍha-niścayaḥ
mayy arpita-mano-buddhir
yo mad-bhaktaḥ sa me priyaḥ
adveṣṭā—not envious; sarva-bhūtānām—for all living entities; maitraḥ—friendly; karuṇaḥ—kindly; eva—certainly; ca—also; nirmamaḥ—with no sense of proprietorship; nirahaṅkāraḥ—without false ego; sama—equally; duḥkhaḥ—distress; sukhaḥ—happiness; kṣamī—forgiving; santuṣṭaḥ—satisfied; satatam—satisfied; yogī—engaged in devotion; yatā-atmā—endeavoring; dṛdḥaniścayaḥ—with determination; mayi—upon Me; arpita—engaged; manaḥ—mind; buddhiḥ—intelligent; yaḥ—one who; mat-bhaktaḥ—My devotee; saḥ me priyaḥ—he is dear to Me.
TRANSLATION
One who is not envious but who is a kind friend to all living entities, who does not think himself a proprietor, who is free from false ego and equal both in happiness and distress, who is always satisfied and engaged in devotional service with determination and whose mind and intelligence are in agreement with Me—he is very dear to Me.
PURPORT
Coming again to the point of pure devotional service, the Lord is describing the transcendental qualifications of a pure devotee in these two verses.
A pure devotee is never disturbed in any circumstances.
Nor is he envious of anyone.
Nor does a devotee become his enemy’s enemy; he thinks that one is acting as his enemy due to his own past misdeeds.
Thus it is better to suffer than to protest.
In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam it is stated: tat te ’nukampāṁ su-samīkṣyamaṇo.
Whenever a devotee is in distress or has fallen into difficulty, he thinks that it is the Lord’s mercy upon him.
He thinks: “Thanks to my past misdeeds I should suffer far, far greater than I am suffering now.
So it is by the mercy of the Supreme Lord that I am not getting all the punishment I am due.
I am just getting a little, by the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.”
Therefore he is always calm, quiet and patient, despite many distressful conditions.
A devotee is also always kind to everyone, even to his enemy.
Nirmama means that a devotee does not attach much importance to the peace and trouble pertaining to the body because he knows perfectly well that he is not the material body.
He does not identify with the body; therefore he is freed from the conception of false ego and is equiposed both in happiness and distress.
He is tolerant, and he is satisfied with whatever comes by the grace of the Supreme Lord.
He does not endeavor much to achieve something with great difficulty; therefore he is always joyful.
He is a completely perfect mystic because he is fixed in the instructions received from the spiritual master, and because his senses are controlled, he is determined.
He is not swayed by false argument because no one can lead him from the fixed determination of devotional service.
He is fully conscious that Kṛṣṇa is the eternal Lord, so no one can disturb him.
All his qualifications enable him to depend entirely on the Supreme Lord.
Such a standard of devotional service is undoubtably very rare, but a devotee becomes situated in that stage by following the regulative principles of devotional service.
Furthermore, the Lord says that such a devotee is very dear to Him, for the Lord is always pleased with all his activities in full Kṛṣṇa consciousness.
