13.13
jñeyaṁ yat tat pravakṣyāmi
yaj jñātvāmṛtam aśnute
anādi mat-paraṁ brahma
na sat tan nāsad ucyate
jñeyam—knowable; yat—that; tat—which; pravakṣyāmi—I shall now explain; yat—which; jñātvā—knowing; amṛtam—nectar; aśnute—taste; anādi—beginningless; mat-param—subordinate to Me; brahma—spirit; na—neither; sat—cause; tat—that; na—nor; asat—effect; ucyate—is called.
TRANSLATION
I shall now explain the knowable, knowing which you will taste the eternal.
This is beginningless, and it is subordinate to Me.
It is called Brahman, the spirit, and it lies beyond the cause and effect of this material world.
PURPORT
The Lord has explained the field of activities and the knower of the field.
He has also explained the process of knowing the knower of the field of activities.
Now He is explaining the knowable, both the soul and the Supersoul respectively.
By knowledge of the knower, both the soul and the Supersoul, one can relish the nectar of life.
As explained in the Second Chapter, the living entity is eternal.
This is also confirmed here.
There is no specific date at which the jīva was born.
Nor can anyone trace out the history of jīvātmā’s manifestation from the Supreme Lord.
Therefore it is beginningless.
The Vedic literature confirms this: na jāyate mṛjayate vā vipaścit.
The knower of the body is never born and never dies, and he is full of knowledge.
The Supreme Lord is also stated in the Vedic literature as pradhāna-kṣetrajña-patir guṇeśaḥ.
The Supreme Lord as the Supersoul is the chief knower of the body, and He is the master of the three modes of material nature.
In the smṛti it is said: dāsa-bhūto harer eva nānyasvaiva kadācana.
The living entities are eternally in the service of the Supreme Lord.
This is also confirmed by Lord Caitanya in His teaching; therefore the description of Brahman mentioned in this verse is in relation to the individual soul, and when the word Brahman is applied to the living entity, it is to be understood that he is vijñānaṁ brahma as opposed to ananta-brahma.
Ananta-brahma is the Supreme Brahman Personality of Godhead.
