17.26-27
sad-bhāve sādhu-bhāve ca
sad ity etat prayujyate
praśaste karmaṇi tathā
sac-chabdaḥ pārtha yujyate
yajñe tapasi dāne ca
sthitiḥ sad iti cocyate
karma caiva tad-arthīyaṁ
sad ity evābhidhīyate
sat-bhāve—in the sense of the nature of the Supreme; sādhu-bhāve—in the sense of the nature of devotion; ca—also; sat—the Supreme; iti—thus; etat—this; prayujyate—is used; praśaste—bona fide; karmaṇi—activities; tathā—also; sat-śabdaḥ—sound; pārtha—O son of Pṛthā; yujyate—is used; yajñe—sacrifice; tapasi—in penance; dāne—charity; ca—also; sthitiḥ—situated; sat—the Supreme; iti—thus; ca—and; ucyate—pronounced; karma—work; ca—also; eva—certainly; tat—that; arthīyam—are meant; sat—Supreme; iti—thus; eva—certainly; abhidhīyate—is practiced.
TRANSLATION
The Absolute Truth is the objective of devotional sacrifice, and it is indicated by the word sat.
These works of sacrifice, of penance and of charity, true to the absolute nature, are performed to please the Supreme Person, O son of Pṛthā.
PURPORT
The words praśaste karmaṇi, or prescribed duties, indicate that there are many activities prescribed in the Vedic literature which are purificatory processes beginning from parental care up to the end of one’s life.
Such purificatory processes are adopted for the ultimate liberation of the living entity.
In all such activities it is recommended that one should vibrate om tat sat.
The words sad-bhāve and sādhu-bhāve indicate the transcendental situation.
One who is acting in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is called sattva, and one who is fully conscious of activities in Kṛṣṇa consciousness is called svarūpa.
In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam it is said that the transcendental subject matter becomes clear in the association of the devotees.
Without good association, one cannot achieve transcendental knowledge.
When initiating a person or offering the sacred thread, one vibrates the words om tat sat.
Similarly, in all kinds of yogic performances, the supreme object, om tat sat is invoked.
These words om tat sat are used to perfect all activities.
This supreme om tat sat makes everything complete.
