18.51-53
buddhyā viśuddhayā yukto
dhṛtyātmānaṁ niyamya ca
śabdādīn viṣayāṁs tyaktvā
rāga-dveṣau vyudasya ca
vivikta-sevī laghv-āśī
yata-vāk-kāya-mānasaḥ
dhyāna-yoga-paro nityaṁ
vairāgyaṁ samupāśritaḥ
ahaṅkāraṁ balaṁ darpaṁ
kāmaṁ krodhaṁ parigraham
vimucya nirmamaḥ śānto
brahma-bhūyāya kalpate
buddhyā—by the intelligence; viśuddhayā—fully purified; yuktaḥ—such engagement; dhṛtyā—determination; ātmānam—self; niyamya—regulated; ca—also; śabdādīn—the sense objects, such as sound, etc.; viṣayān—sense objects; tyaktvā—giving up; rāga—attachments; dveṣau—hatred; vyudasya—having laid aside; ca—also; vivikta-sevī—living in a secluded place; laghu-āśī—eating a small quantity; yata-vāk—control of speech; kāya—body; mānasaḥ—control of the mind; dhyāna-yoga-paraḥ—always absorbed in trance; nityam—twenty-four hours a day; vairāgyam—detachment; samupāśritaḥ—taken shelter of; ahaṅkāram—false ego; balam—false strength; darpam—false pride; kāmam—lust; krodham—anger; parigraham—acceptance of material things; vimucya—being delivered; nirmamaḥ—without proprietorship; śāntaḥ—peaceful; brahma-bhūyāya—to become self-realized; kalpate—is understood.
TRANSLATION
Being purified by his intelligence and controlling the mind with determination, giving up the objects of sense gratification, being freed from attachment and hatred, one who lives in a secluded place, who eats little and who controls the body and the tongue, and is always in trance and is detached, who is without false ego, false strength, false pride, lust, anger, and who does not accept material things, such a person is certainly elevated to the position of self-realization.
PURPORT
When one is purified by knowledge, he keeps himself in the mode of goodness.
Thus one becomes the controller of the mind and is always in trance.
Because he is not attached to the objects of sense gratification, he does not eat more than what he requires, and he controls the activities of his body and mind.
He has no false ego because he does not accept the body as himself.
Nor has he a desire to make the body fat and strong by accepting so many material things.
Because he has no bodily concept of life, he is not falsely proud.
He is satisfied with everything that is offered to him by the grace of the Lord, and he is never angry in the absence of sense gratification.
Nor does he endeavor to acquire sense objects.
Thus when he is completely free from false ego, he becomes nonattached to all material things, and that is the stage of self-realization of Brahman.
That stage is called the brahma-bhūta stage.
When one is free from the material conception of life, he becomes peaceful and cannot be agitated.
